# Profitless Projects that Matter!

Draft

Creating applications is relatvely easy today. With the abundance of frameworks, platforms and services it's possible to construct functional applications that add value for at least one individual. In a way, this harkens back to the original users of computers who wrote applications to solve their own problems, or more colloquially scratch their own itch. 

What is more difficult is creating an application that can be a viable business. Creating something of sufficient and sustained value to fund an operation is incredibly difficult and very risky. As a result, this usually leads to applications that serve a large need, but often a need that is trivial or a convenience. However, meeting that large need it can be profitable. On the flip side, this also means that applications that can be easily written are often neglected and overlooked. This is a shame, because cost effective compute can increasingly solve problems that will markedly improve a smaller populations lives. This is very much akin to the problem of "orphan drugs' or "rare diseases" in the pharmaceutical space. In the drug space, the barriers of approval are high (and in many ways justifiably so) which rules out research on these rare diseases because it cannot be profitable. 

What is captured in this repository are software projects that are similar to these rare disease drug challenges, too small a market to build a business. But unlike drug discovery, the cost of software is much less. So this is an invitation to developers who are looking for projects that can make a difference to practice on or just plain old volunteer. Ideally they really use technology, and are not just simple CRUD applications. But if there is specific data that can make a difference if collected well. They should be able to be written in a way that the recipient can conceivably run easily via a PaaS or good old fashion shared hosting. Or better yet, a stand alone mobile or desktop application that can be downloaded and installed with no future maintenance needed. 

This project was kicked off by an accidental discovery that I made trying to help my father who is suffering from a neurodegenerative disease known as Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, but better known as PSP. Falls are a common consequence of this disease which impacts neurocontrol, and my father had a fall that resulted in a Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) that impacted his speech. As part of his rehabilitation he received speech therapy which involved a speech therapist providing a list of words catered to the issues the patient is having. And then like a personal trainer, would work with the exercises and giving feedback on how the patient is doing. However, this was limited to when the Speech Therapist was present. This repetitive process naturally seemsed like something that could improved with software. It also seemed that the new speech recognition models could tell whether a word was spoken correctly, and if not the speech recognizer, could indicate what word it did hear. The success rate could be tracked, and the speech therapist could see the results and adjust the word list accordingly.

A simple example is the word "later", which may be responded by a patient to a query such as "would you like dinner? and the patient could reply "later", but due to the injury the word could come out as "latter" or "ladder" or "laider". Displaying what was heard could let the patient adjust. I also assumed if the speech recognizer could understand what was said, others could as well. 

With that assumption, I wrote an iOS application using the speech recognizer of the platform to provide speech exercises. I put it in the app store, and to my surprise it was downloaded by many people. Now the numbers of downloads are in the 10s per week, not enough to build a business. But for the people who used it, it provided another tool to try at no cost. Seeing that "success" I realized there were other problems that would benefit from small scale software projects. The question is how to get those who needed those solutions to those who could implement them. Hence the genesis of this project. 
